# Constants library

The DB48X calculator features a library of constants covering mathematics,
physics, chemistry and computer science. The built-in constants can be extended
using the `config/constants.csv` configuration file.

## Mathematics constants

### π constant

The ratio between the circumference and the diameter of a circle.

![Definition of π](img/definition_of_pi.bmp)

### e constant

Euler's constant is the base for the natural logarithm.

![Definition of e](img/definition_of_e.bmp)

### ⅈ constant

The imaginary unit, such that ⅈ²=-1.

The picture below shows imaginary unit ⅈ in the complex plane: Real numbers are
conventionally drawn on the horizontal axis, and imaginary numbers on the
vertical axis.

![Imaginary unit](img/imaginary_unit.bmp)

### ⅉ constant

An alternative notation, often preferred by physicists, for the imaginary unit ⅈ, verifying ⅉ²=-1.

### ∞ constant

Infinity is something that is larger than any natural number.
Its numerical value is an arbitrary large number that is not really infinite.

### ? constant

The undefined constant is used to represent undefined values, such as the result of undefined operations.

### rad constant

This constant defines corresponds to one radian.


### twoπ constant

This constant holds the value of two times [π](#π-constant).

### angl constant

This constants holds one half-turn expressed in degrees.


## Chemistry constant

### NA constant

Avogradro constant is the number of constituent particles per mole.

### k constant

The Boltzmann constant is the proportionality factor that relates the average
relative thermal energy of particles in a gas with the thermodynamic temperature
of the gas.

### Vm constant

Molar volume of an ideal gas at 1 atmosphere of pressure and 0°C.

### R constant

The universal gas constant is the molar equivalent to the Boltzmann constant,
expressed in units of energy per temperature increment per amount of substance,
rather than energy per temperature increment per particle.

### σ constant

Stefan-Boltzmann constant, the factor of proportionality in the Stefan-Boltzmann
law describing the intensity of the thermal radiation emitted by matter in terms
of that matter's temperature.

For an ideal absorber/emitter or black body, the Stefan–Boltzmann law states
that the total energy radiated per unit surface area per unit time (also known
as the radiant exitance) is directly proportional to the fourth power of the
black body's temperature, T:`M°=σ·T⁴`

### StdT constant

Standard temperature as defined by IUPAC in 1982.

Standard temperature and pressure (STP) or Standard conditions for temperature
and pressure are various standard sets of conditions for experimental
measurements used to allow comparisons to be made between different sets of
data. The most used standards are those of the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC, used by DB48X) and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST). Other organizations have established a variety of other
definitions.

### StdP constant

Standard pressure as defined by IUPAC in 1982, corresponding to 1 atm

Standard temperature and pressure (STP) or Standard conditions for temperature
and pressure are various standard sets of conditions for experimental
measurements used to allow comparisons to be made between different sets of
data. The most used standards are those of the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC, used by DB48X) and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST). Other organizations have established a variety of other
definitions.

### Mu constant

Molar mass constant, defined as one twelfth of the molar mass of carbon-12.

Following the 2019 revision of the SI system, the
[Avogadro constant](#na-constant) became exact. As a result the molar mass
constant is no longer exactly `1_g/mol`.

### MC12 constant

Molar mass of carbon-12

### n0 constant

Loschmidt constant

Number of particles of an ideal gas per volume at standard temperature and
pressure.

### SoR constant

Sakur-Tetrode constant

This constant is used in the Sakur-Tetrode equation expression the entropy of a
monoatomic ideal gas in terms of its thermodynamic state.

### Da constant

The Dalton constant is the unit mass defined as one twelfth the mass of an
unbound neutral atom of carbon-12 in its nuclear and electronic ground state and
at rest.


### kq constant

This constant expresses the ratio of Boltzmann constant by the electron charge.


## Physics constants

### ⅉ constant

Notation often used in physics for the imaginary verifying ⅉ²=-1.

### c constant

Speed of light in vaccuum, a universal physical constant that is exactly equal
to 299,792,458 metres per second (by definition of the metre).

According to the [special theory of relativity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_relativity),
 *c* is the upper limit for the speed at which conventional matter or energy
(and thus any signal carrying information) can travel through space.

The [theory of incomplete measurements](http://physics.dinechin.org) presents
space and time as having no existence on their own. We only derive them from
*measurements* of distance and duration made using photons. In that viewpoint,
*c* is the limit of what can be measured using photons. Anything travelling
faster than light is indistinguishable from anti-matter. This is illustrated by
the thought experiment known (or not) as the *bat and the supersonic jet*.
This little tidbit is only mentioned here because this particular theory was
devised by the primary author of DB48X.

### G constant

The gravitational constant is an empirical physical constant involved in the
calculation of gravitational effects in Sir Isaac Newton's law of universal
gravitation and in Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity.

According to Newton's law of universal gravitation, the magnitude of the
attractive force (F) between two bodies each with a spherically symmetric
density distribution is directly proportional to the product of their masses, m₁
and m₂, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance, r, directed
along the line connecting their centres of mass:

![Newton Gravitation](img/NewtonGravitation.bmp)

### g constant

Acceleration of Earth gravity, equivalent to the free-fall acceleration.

### Z₀ constant

Vaccuum characteristic impedance, also called impedance of free space.

This constant relates the magnitudes of the electric and magnetic fields of
electromagnetic radiation travelling through free space.

### ε₀ constant

Vacuum permittivity, commonly denoted ε₀ (pronounced "epsilon nought" or
"epsilon zero"), is the value of the absolute dielectric permittivity of
classical vacuum. It may also be referred to as the permittivity of free space,
the electric constant, or the distributed capacitance of the vacuum. It is an
ideal (baseline) physical constant. It is a measure of how dense of an electric
field is "permitted" to form in response to electric charges and relates the
units for electric charge to mechanical quantities such as length and force.

### μ₀ constant

The vacuum magnetic permeability (variously vacuum permeability, permeability of
free space, permeability of vacuum, magnetic constant) is the magnetic
permeability in a classical vacuum. It is a physical constant, conventionally
written as μ₀ (pronounced "mu nought" or "mu zero"). It quantifies the strength
of the magnetic field induced by an electric current.

## Mass constants

### me constant

Electron mass. In particle physics, the electron mass is the mass of a
stationary electron, also known as the invariant mass of the electron. It is one
of the fundamental constants of physics. It has a value of about `9.109⁳⁻³¹`
kilograms

### mn constant

Neutron mass measurement.


### mp constant

Proton mass measurement.

### mH constant

Hydrogen mass measurement.

### u constant

Unified atomic mass unit.

A unit of mass defined as one twelfth of the mass of an unbound neutral atom of
carbon-12 in its nuclear and electronic ground state and at rest. It is a non-SI
unit accepted for use with SI. It is identical to the [Dalton](#dalton constant).

## Quantum constants

### h constant

The Planck constant is a fundamental physical constant that appears in quantum
mechanics. A photon's energy is equal to its frequency multiplied by the Planck
constant (`E=h·ν`), and the wavelength of a matter wave equals the Planck constant
divided by the associated particle momentum (`λ=h/p`).

### ℏ constant

The reduced Planck constant, ℏ, also known as the Dirac Constant, is defined as
`ℏ=h/2π`.


## Electromagnetism constants

### qe constant

The elementary electric charge is a fundamental physical constant, defined as
the electric charge carried by a single proton or, equivalently, the magnitude
of the negative electric charge carried by a single electron, which has charge
−qe.

In the SI system of units, the value of the elementary charge is exactly defined
as `qe=1.602176634⁳⁻¹⁹` coulombs. Since the 2019 redefinition of SI base units,
the seven SI base units are defined by seven fundamental physical constants, of
which the elementary charge is one. As a consequence of this change, the value
of that constant in DB48X differs from the value in the HP50G, which named it q,
with value `1.60217733⁳⁻¹⁹` coulombs.

### qme constant

Ratio between the electron charge and its mass.

### mp constant

Mass of the proton.

### mpme constant

Ratio between the mass of the proton and the mass of the electron.

### α constant

Fine-structure constant. In physics, the fine-structure constant, also known as
the Sommerfeld constant, commonly denoted by α (the Greek letter alpha), is a
fundamental physical constant which quantifies the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction between elementary charged particles.

It is a dimensionless quantity, independent of the system of units used, which
is related to the strength of the coupling of an elementary charge e with the
electromagnetic field.

### ø constant

Magnetic flux quantum. The (superconducting) magnetic flux quantum is a
combination of fundamental physical constants: the Planck constant h and the
electron charge e. Its value is, therefore, the same for any superconductor.

### F constant

Faraday constant. In physical chemistry, the Faraday constant is a physical
constant defined as the quotient of the total electric charge (q) by the amount
(n) of elementary charge carriers in any given sample of matter

### R∞ constant

Rydberg constant. In spectroscopy, the Rydberg constant is a physical constant
relating to the electromagnetic spectra of an atom. The constant first arose as
an empirical fitting parameter in the Rydberg formula for the hydrogen spectral
series, but Niels Bohr later showed that its value could be calculated from more
fundamental constants according to his model of the atom.


## Size constants

### a0 constant

Bohr radius. The Bohr radius is a physical constant, approximately equal to the
most probable distance between the nucleus and the electron in a hydrogen atom
in its ground state.


## Magnetism constants

### μB constant

Bohr magneton. In atomic physics, the Bohr magneton is a physical constant and
the natural unit for expressing the magnetic moment of an electron caused by its
orbital or spin angular momentum. In SI units, the Bohr magneton is defined as
`μB=qe*ℏ/(2·me)`.


### μN constant

The nuclear magneton is a physical constant of magnetic moment, defined in SI
units by `μN=qe·ℏ/(2·mp)`.


### λ0 constant

Photon wavelength. Photon energy can be expressed using any unit of energy such
as the electronvolt (eV) or the Joule (J). For short wavelength sources,
researchers often discuss photon energies in units of eV (or keV for hard
X-rays) out of convenience.  The SI definition for 1 eV derives from the
[definitional value of the electron charge](#me-constant). Photon energy `E` in
eV can be computed from wavelength `l` in nm as: `E=λ0/l`.

### f0 constant

Photon frequency. This is the frequency associated to the
[photon wavelength λ0][#λ0-constant].


## Scattering constants

### λc constant

Compton wavelength. The Compton wavelength is a quantum mechanical property of a
particle, defined as the wavelength of a photon whose energy is the same as the
rest energy of that particle (based on the mass–energy equivalence).

The standard Compton wavelength `λ` of a particle of mass `m` is given by
`λ=h/(m·c)`

### rad constant

One radian.

### twoπ constant

Two π radian (one full circle).

### angl constant

Half turn in degrees.

### c3 constant

Wien's constant. In physics, Wien's displacement law states that the black-body
radiation curve for different temperatures will peak at different wavelengths
that are inversely proportional to the temperature. The shift of that peak is a
direct consequence of the Planck radiation law, which describes the spectral
brightness or intensity of black-body radiation as a function of wavelength at
any given temperature. However, it had been discovered by German physicist
Wilhelm Wien several years before Max Planck developed that more general
equation, and describes the entire shift of the spectrum of black-body radiation
toward shorter wavelengths as temperature increases.

Formally, the wavelength version of Wien's displacement law states that the
spectral radiance of black-body radiation per unit wavelength, peaks at the
wavelength `λpeak=c3/T` where `T` is absolute temperature.

### kq constant

Ratio of the [Boltzman constant][#k-constant] by the
[elementary charge](#qe-constant): `kq=k/qe`.


## Materials constants

### ε₀q constant

Ratio of the [vaccum permittivity](#ε₀-constant) by the
[elementary charge](#qe-constant): `ε₀q=ε₀/qe`.


### qε₀ constant

Product of the [vaccum permittivity](#ε₀-constant) by the
[elementary charge](#qe-constant): `qε₀=ε₀·qe`.

### εsi constant

Dielectric constant of silicon. The dielectric constant (or relative
permittivity), is a material property that measures how well an applied electric
field can penetrate a dielectric medium compared to a vacuum. A higher value
corresponds to a lower penetration.

### εox constant

SiO2 dielectric constant. The dielectric constant (or relative
permittivity), is a material property that measures how well an applied electric
field can penetrate a dielectric medium compared to a vacuum. A higher value
corresponds to a lower penetration.

### I₀ constant

Reference sound intensity. Sound intensity level or acoustic intensity level is
the level of the intensity of a sound relative to a reference value. It is a
logarithmic quantity, most often expressed in decibels dB. I₀ is the sound
intensity used as a reference, corresponding to 0dB.


## Dates Constants

### BastilleDay constant

French national day

### MartinLutherKingDeath constant

Martin Luther King Jr., an African-American clergyman and civil rights movement
leader, was fatally shot at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tennessee, on April
4, 1968, at 6:01 p.m.

### IndependenceDay constant

Independence Day, known colloquially as the Fourth of July, is a federal holiday
in the United States which commemorates the ratification of the Declaration of
Independence by the Second Continental Congress on July 4, 1776, establishing
the United States of America.

## Computing constants

### No constant

The value of "No" is false

### Yes constant

The value of "Yes" is true

### UnixEpoch constant

Date from which all dates are counted in Unix computer systems.

### SinclairZX81RAM constant

Amount of memory in the Sinclair ZX81 personal computer.
This is also the amount of memory used in the video memory for the mouse cursor
at its smallest size on modern computers.

### PageSize constant

Base page size in the virtual memory system of most modern computers. Note that
for performance reason, many modern computers now support multiple page sizes.

### HelloWorld constant

A constant often used in computer programs to denote joy, happiness and the
emergence into the world of some new computer language.
